6.10 Garbage Collection & Finalize

1. Automatic Process: Garbage collection is managed by the Java Virtual Machine (JVM),
                      running in the background.

2. Object Eligibility: Objects that are no longer reachable,
                       meaning no active references to them,
                       are eligible for garbage collection.

3. No Manual Control: Unlike languages like C++,
                      Java developers cannot explicitly deallocate memory.
                      Garbage collection is automatic and non-deterministic.

4. Generational Collection: Java uses a generational garbage collection strategy,
                            which divides memory into different regions
                            (young, old, and permanent generations)
                            based on object ages.

  ➡️ jo bhi heap me esa object h jiska reference nhi h stack me uss garbage collection ko htana h
     GC jayega hr ek object ke pas dekhega uska reference h ya nhi agr nhi h to uss object ko bahar
     fek dega aur uss memory ko empty declare kr dega. fir jb koi bhi LIKHEGA new to wo object dobara
     uss heap ki location me rkha jayega

  ➡️ Example whatsapp pr dekh lena smjhna ho to part 2(4:18:11)

           young                 old                permanent generations
             ⬇️                   ⬇️                          ⬇️
        jo latest           esa object jise        jo lumbe time se old me
        bne hi h           koi na koi access       h to usse ab PG me daal
        wo young            kre hi ja rha h        dete h
        me rehte h
                             esa obj jo lumbe       jvm kehta h me tere pas
        jo isme tik          time se heap me        bohot hi kum baar aauga
        jayega usse          bna hua h to usse
        old me daal           old category me
          denge                 daal denge

                             isme kya hoga
                             jvm bolega isse
                             me tumhe thodi
                             thodi der me aakr
                             check krunga
                             ki koi obj faltu
                             to nhi h

                           jo isme tik jayega
                           wo PG me chale jayega

5. Heap Memory: Garbage collection occurs in the heap memory,
                where all Java objects reside.

6. Performance Impact: Garbage collection can affect application performance,
                       particularly if it runs frequently or takes a long time to complete.


* Finalize Concept

1. Finalization: Before an object is garbage collected, the finalize() method may be called,
                 giving the object a chance to clean up resources. However,
                 it's not guaranteed to run, and its usage is generally discouraged.

2. Optimization: Developers can optimize the process indirectly through
                 code practices like setting unnecessary object references to null.

3. System.gc() Call: While System.gc() suggest that the JVM performs garbage collection,
                     it's not a guarantee.